Initial bits for .NET Aspire release 9.0-rc1 (#1810)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/whats-new/release-candidate-1.md

---
title: .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1)
description: Learn what's new with .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1).
ms.date: 10/11/2024
---

# .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1)

> .NET Aspire 9.0 is the next major release of .NET Aspire; it will support BOTH .NET 8 (LTS) and .NET 9. .NET Aspire 9 addresses some of the most highly requested features and pain points from the community. 

Reviewer: More of a question, do we normally refer to `.NET Aspire 9.0` or `.NET Aspire 9`?

Reviewer: pain points -> feedback?

Reviewer 2: Suggest edits

## Upgrading to .NET Aspire 9.0

Instructions on how to upgrade here
- Visual Studio
- Visual Studio Code
- Command Line
- Upgrade assistant ???

### Acquisition

.NET Aspire 9.0 simplifies acquisition by providing an MSBuild SDK (**Aspire.AppHost.Sdk**) via NuGet. This will no longer require an extra step to acquire the tooling required to build .NET Aspire projects.

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <Sdk Name="Aspire.AppHost.Sdk" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <IsAspireHost>true</IsAspireHost>
    <UserSecretsId>0afc20a6-cd99-4bf7-aae1-1359b0d45189</UserSecretsId>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.AppHost" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

### Templates

.NET Aspire 9.0 introduces a new project template for creating .NET Aspire projects. This template is available via the `dotnet new` command. These can be installed by running the following command:

```shell

> dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1

Reviewer: Should include example commands for creating new project from templates for .NET 8 and .NET 9.

```

![dotnet new templates](images/templates.png)

## Dashboard

### Stop/Start/Restart Resources

The most requested feature for the dashboard is the ability to stop, start, and restart resources. This feature is now available in .NET Aspire 9.

<video controls src="videos/start-stop-restart.mp4" title="Title"></video>

This feature works for projects, containers and executables. It enables restarting indidivual resources without having to restart the entire app host. For projects, if the debugger is attached, on restart, the debugger will be re-attached.

- Responsive design
- Mobile friendly

## App Host (Orchestration)

### Waiting for dependencies

> The app host now supports waiting for dependencies to be ready before starting another resource. This is useful when a resource sources take a long time to start up. The app host will wait for the resource to be ready before starting the dependent resource.

Reviewer: resource _sources_? seems like strange phrasing

```C#
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var queue = builder.AddRabbitMQ("rabbit");

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
    .WithReference(queue).WaitFor(queue);

builder.Build().Run();
```

When the app host starts, it will wait for the `rabbit` resource to be ready before starting the `api` resource:

> <video controls src="videos/waitfor.mp4" title="Title"></video>

Author: Put this is the `/media` dir.

```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<video controls src="media/waitfor.mp4" title="Title"></video>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->
```

> There are 2 methods exposed to wait for a resource:

Author: ```suggestion
There are two methods exposed to wait for a resource:
```

> 1. `WaitFor` - Wait for a resource to be ready before starting another resource.
> 2. `WaitForCompletion` - Wait for a resource to complete before starting another resource.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `WaitFor`: Wait for a resource to be ready before starting another resource.
1. `WaitForCompletion`: Wait for a resource to complete before starting another resource.
```

> #### Resource Health Checks

Author: Sentence case for all headings.

```suggestion
#### Resource health checks
```

`WaitFor` uses health checks to determine if a resource is ready. If a resource does not have any health checks, the app host will wait for the resource to be in the "Running" state before starting the dependent resource.

You can now attach health checks to resources. These health checks use the `IHealthCheck` interface from the `Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.HealthChecks` namespace.

```C#
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var catalogApi = builder.AddContainer("catalog-api", "catalog-api")
                 .WithHttpEndpoint(targetPort: 8080)

>                  .WithHttpHealthCheck("/healthz");

Reviewer: We could use an example of adding a custom health check as well (or is it too much for the release notes).

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest mentioning it in the release notes and write a separate article on doing it.

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("store")
    .WithReference(catalogApi.GetEndpoint("http"))
    .WaitFor(catalogApi);

builder.Build().Run();
```

> The above example adds a health check to the `catalog-api` resource. The app host will wait for the health check to return a healthy status before starting the `store` resource. It'll determine that the resource is ready when the the /healthz endpoint returns a 200 status code.

Reviewer 4: A screenshot showing how we surface health check data in the dashboard would be good here.

Reviewer 4: I added some screenshots. @mitchdenny they're in a section I think you wrote, which I had to wrangle a little. PTAL.

> ### Persistent Containers

Author: ```suggestion
### Persistent containers
```

The app host now supports persistent containers. This is useful when you want to keep the container running even after the app host has stopped. These containers will not be stopped unless they are stopped manually using the container runtime.

To do this, call the `WithLifetime` method and pass in `ContainerLifetime.Persistent`:

```C#
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var queue = builder.AddRabbitMQ("rabbit")
                   .WithLifetime(ContainerLifetime.Persistent);

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
    .WithReference(queue).WaitFor(queue);

builder.Build().Run();
```

The dashboard will show persistent containers with a pin icon:

![Persistent containers](images/persistent-container.png)

After the app host has stopped, the container will continue to run:

![Docker desktop showing rabbit mq](images/persisent-container-dockerdesktop.png)

> 

Reviewer: Need some kind of qualification here about if/when we will restart the container.

using StackExchange.Redis;

public static class RedisCommandExtensions
{
    public static IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> WithClearCommand(this IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> builder)
    {
        builder.WithCommand("clear-cache", "Clear Cache",
            async context =>
            {
                var redisConnectionString = await builder.Resource.GetConnectionStringAsync() 
                    ?? throw new InvalidOperationException("Unable to get the Redis connection string.");
                
                using var connection = ConnectionMultiplexer.Connect(redisConnectionString);

                await connection.GetDatabase().ExecuteAsync("FLUSHALL");

                return CommandResults.Success();
            },
            context =>
            {
                if (context.ResourceSnapshot.HealthStatus == HealthStatus.Healthy)
                {
                    return ResourceCommandState.Enabled;
                }
                return ResourceCommandState.Disabled;
            });
        return builder;
    }
}
```

These commands can be run from the dashboard:

![Clear cache command on dashboard](images/clear-cache-command.png)

> <video controls src="videos/custom-command.mp4" title="Title"></video>

Author: Put this is the `/media` dir.

```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<video controls src="videos/custom-command.mp4" title="Title"></video>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->
```

### Container Networking

The app host now adds all containers to a common network (`default-aspire-network`). This is useful when you want to communicate between containers without going through the host network. 

This also makes it easier to migrate from docker compose to the app host, as containers can communicate with each other using the container name.

> ### Eventing model

Reviewer: Eventing model arrived in 8.2. The thing we did add for 9.0 is the ability to fire off async.

Reviewer 2: It was experimental so it didn’t matter then 😁

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <Sdk Name="Aspire.AppHost.Sdk" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <IsAspireHost>true</IsAspireHost>
    <UserSecretsId>0afc20a6-cd99-4bf7-aae1-1359b0d45189</UserSecretsId>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.AppHost" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

### Templates

.NET Aspire 9.0 introduces a new project template for creating .NET Aspire projects. This template is available via the `dotnet new` command. These can be installed by running the following command:

```shell
dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1
```

![dotnet new templates](images/templates.png)

## Dashboard

### Stop/Start/Restart Resources

The most requested feature for the dashboard is the ability to stop, start, and restart resources. This feature is now available in .NET Aspire 9.

> <video controls src="videos/start-stop-restart.mp4" title="Title"></video>

Author: Put this is the `/media` dir.

```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<video controls src="videos/start-stop-restart.mp4" title="Title"></video>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->
```

This feature works for projects, containers and executables. It enables restarting indidivual resources without having to restart the entire app host. For projects, if the debugger is attached, on restart, the debugger will be re-attached.

- Responsive design
- Mobile friendly

## App Host (Orchestration)

### Waiting for dependencies

> The app host now supports waiting for dependencies to be ready before starting another resource. This is useful when a resource sources take a long time to start up. The app host will wait for the resource to be ready before starting the dependent resource.

Author: ```suggestion
The app host now supports waiting for dependencies to be ready before starting another resource. This is useful when a resource is taking a long time to start up. The app host will wait for the resource to be ready before starting any dependent resources.
```

{
    public static IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> WithClearCommand(this IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> builder)
    {
        builder.WithCommand("clear-cache", "Clear Cache",
            async context =>
            {
                var redisConnectionString = await builder.Resource.GetConnectionStringAsync() 
                    ?? throw new InvalidOperationException("Unable to get the Redis connection string.");
                
                using var connection = ConnectionMultiplexer.Connect(redisConnectionString);

                await connection.GetDatabase().ExecuteAsync("FLUSHALL");

                return CommandResults.Success();
            },
            context =>
            {
                if (context.ResourceSnapshot.HealthStatus == HealthStatus.Healthy)
                {
                    return ResourceCommandState.Enabled;
                }
                return ResourceCommandState.Disabled;
            });
        return builder;
    }
}
```

These commands can be run from the dashboard:

![Clear cache command on dashboard](images/clear-cache-command.png)

<video controls src="videos/custom-command.mp4" title="Title"></video>

> ### Container Networking

Author: ```suggestion
### Container networking
```

> The app host now adds all containers to a common network (`default-aspire-network`). This is useful when you want to communicate between containers without going through the host network. 

Author: ```suggestion
The app host now adds all containers to a common network (`default-aspire-network`). This is useful when you want to communicate between containers without going through the host network.
```

A community contribution from [@mangeg](https://github.com/mangeg) improved support for ANSI escape codes and removed this limitation. Behold:

![Colorful console logs](images/console-logs-ansi-text-format.png)

Another improvement to console logs is hiding unsupported escape codes. Codes that aren't related to displaying text, such as positioning the cursor or communicating with the operating system don't make sense in this UI, and are hidden.

## Telemetry

### Improve telemetry filtering

Traces can now be filtered with attribute values. For example, if you only want to view traces for one endpoint in your app, the `http.route` attribute on HTTP requests can be filtered to a specified value.

Telemetry filtering also supports auto-complete of existing values. The **Add filter** dialog provides a combo box for selecting from values that dashboard has received. This feature makes it much easier to filter to real data and helps avoid typos by entered a value yourself.

> <video controls src="videos/trace-filter.mp4" title="Video of filtering traces"></video>

Reviewer 5: I added this video but I don't see it in the preview. Usually I use gifs rather than video for animations so I'm not sure about the process here.

Why isn't it visible?

cc @IEvangelist

Author: We can't reference videos in this way. They have to be uploaded to the Learn [video server](https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/help/platform/video-service-upload?branch=main&tabs=add%2Cbrowser%2Cframe).

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <Sdk Name="Aspire.AppHost.Sdk" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <IsAspireHost>true</IsAspireHost>
    <UserSecretsId>0afc20a6-cd99-4bf7-aae1-1359b0d45189</UserSecretsId>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.AppHost" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

For more information, see [.NET Aspire app host project](../fundamentals/app-host-overview.md#app-host-project).

### Templates

.NET Aspire 9 introduces a new project template for creating .NET Aspire projects. This template is available from the [`dotnet new` command](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-new). These can be installed by running the following command:

```dotnetcli

> dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1

Reviewer: Seems like we are going to need to use ```--force``` with ```dotnet new install```. @joperezr just wanted to confirm this before I update this text.

> .NET Aspire 9 introduces a new project template for creating .NET Aspire projects. This template is available from the [`dotnet new` command](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-new). These can be installed by running the following command:
> 
> ```dotnetcli
> dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1
> ```
> 
> TODO: Paste command output here in a triple-back-tick `dotnetcli` code block.
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
.NET Aspire 9 is moving the contents that used to be installed via the SDK Workload into separate NuGet Packages. This includes the templates for creating new .NET Aspire projects. These templates can now be installed using the [`dotnet new install` command](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-new). These can be installed by running the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1
```

**Hint:** If you already have the .NET Aspire Workload installed, you will need to pass the `--force` flag to overwrite the existing templates.

This is the output you should see after installing the templates in a machine that has the .NET Aspire Workload installed:

```dotnetcli
> dotnet new install Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1 --force
The following template packages will be installed:
   Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1

Installing the template package(s) will override the available template package(s).
The following template package(s) are already available:
   Aspire.ProjectTemplates::8.2.1

Success: Aspire.ProjectTemplates::9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1 installed the following templates:
Template Name                    Short Name                                       Language  Tags
-------------------------------  -----------------------------------------------  --------  -------------------------------------------------------
.NET Aspire 8 App Host           aspire-apphost-8                                 [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud
.NET Aspire 8 Empty App          aspire-8                                         [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 8 Service Defaults   aspire-servicedefaults-8                         [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 8 Starter App        aspire-starter-8                                 [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Blazor/Web/Web API/API/Service/Cloud
.NET Aspire 8 Test Project (...  aspire-mstest-8                                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 8 Test Project (...  aspire-nunit-8                                   [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 8 Test Project (...  aspire-xunit-8                                   [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 App Host           aspire-apphost,aspire-apphost-9                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud
.NET Aspire 9 Empty App          aspire,aspire-9                                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Service Defaults   aspire-servicedefaults,aspire-servicedefaults-9  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Starter App        aspire-starter,aspire-starter-9                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Blazor/Web/Web API/API/Service/Cloud
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-mstest,aspire-mstest-9                    [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-nunit,aspire-nunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-xunit,aspire-xunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
```

```

.NET Aspire 9 Empty App          aspire,aspire-9                                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Service Defaults   aspire-servicedefaults,aspire-servicedefaults-9  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Starter App        aspire-starter,aspire-starter-9                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Blazor/Web/Web API/API/Service/Cloud
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-mstest,aspire-mstest-9                    [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-nunit,aspire-nunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-xunit,aspire-xunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
```

## Dashboard

### Manage resource lifecycle

The most requested feature for the dashboard is to manage the lifecycles of your orchestrated named resources. Specifically, the ability to stop, start, and restart resources. This feature is now available in .NET Aspire 9.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->

> <video controls src="videos/start-stop-restart.mp4" title="Title"></video>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<video controls src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3937ca4e-4ac9-4af7-938d-d016aa6277dc" title="Demo of managing resource lifecycle in the dashboard"></video>
```

.NET Aspire 8 Test Project (...  aspire-xunit-8                                   [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 App Host           aspire-apphost,aspire-apphost-9                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud
.NET Aspire 9 Empty App          aspire,aspire-9                                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Service Defaults   aspire-servicedefaults,aspire-servicedefaults-9  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service
.NET Aspire 9 Starter App        aspire-starter,aspire-starter-9                  [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Blazor/Web/Web API/API/Service/Cloud
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-mstest,aspire-mstest-9                    [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-nunit,aspire-nunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
.NET Aspire 9 Test Project (...  aspire-xunit,aspire-xunit-9                      [C#]      Common/.NET Aspire/Cloud/Web/Web API/API/Service/Test
```

> Now you have the .NET Aspire 9 templates installed on your machine. You can create a new .NET Aspire 9 project by running the following command:

Reviewer 4: We use the versions `9.0` and `9` for Aspire inconsistently throughout the document. Which should it be? Most other examples seem to be 9.0.

```suggestion
Now you have the .NET Aspire 9.0 templates installed on your machine. You can create a new .NET Aspire 9.0 project by running the following command:
```

Author: The first time we talk about it, we should say ".NET Aspire 9.0". Then after that, we should say ".NET Aspire 9" for simplicity.

Reviewer 4: Makes sense. There are a bunch of places to fix up then :)

    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <IsAspireHost>true</IsAspireHost>
    <UserSecretsId>84e68884-8bc6-4b5b-9880-9544745c89e1</UserSecretsId>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\MyApiService\MyApiService.csproj" />
    <ProjectReference Include="..\MyWebFrontend\MyWebFrontend.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
-    <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.AppHost" Version="8.2.1" />
+    <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting.AppHost" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

That's it! You have successfully upgraded your project to .NET Aspire 9.0 RC 1. If you are using Visual Studio, it is recommended to upgrade to version 17.12 Preview 3 or later in order to take advantage of the new features and improvements for .NET Aspire 9.0.

### Upgrade an existing project to .NET Aspire 9.0 using the Upgrade Assistant

For this release, we are introducing .NET Aspire support to the Upgrade Assistant. The Upgrade Assistant is a tool that helps you upgrade your .NET projects to the latest .NET version. Now you can also use the Upgrade Assistant to upgrade your .NET Aspire projects to 9.0 RC 1.

> To start the upgrade process, right-click your AppHost project in Visual Studio and select the option `Upgrade`.

Reviewer 4: Does the CLI version of Upgrade Assistant work for Aspire, and do we want to call it out for non-VS users? @abpiskunov 

Potentially link somewhere in this section to: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/platform/upgrade-assistant

Reviewer 7: Yes CLI supports all the same upgrades as Visual Studio. I will ask our PM to mention that.

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

This feature works for projects, containers and executables. It enables restarting indidivual resources without having to restart the entire app host. For projects, if the debugger is attached, on restart, the debugger will be re-attached.

- Responsive design
- Mobile friendly

### Sensitive properties, volumes and health checks in resource details

Resource details has seen a lot of improvements:

- Properties can be marked as sensitive, automatically masking them in the dashboard UI. This is a security feature to avoid accidently disclosing keys or passwords when screen sharing the dashboard with other people. For example, container arguments could pass sensitive information and so are masked by default.

- Configured container volumes are listed in resource details.

- Detailed information about resource health checks, a new feature in Aspire 9, are listed in resource details. This information is useful to understand why a resource might be marked as unhealthy. Find out more about health checks [here](#resource-health-checks).

> ### Coloreful console log

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Colorful console log
```

> [ANSI escape codes](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code) are used to add text formatting to text. For example, foreground and background colors, bold, underline, italics, etc. The dashboard console logs page previously supported rendering one ANSI escape code at a time and failed when they were combined together. The console logs page could show red text, but it couldn't show text that is red and bold at the same time.

Reviewer 4: I feel like this is easier to understand:

```suggestion
[ANSI escape codes](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code) format text in terminals by controlling colors (foreground and background) and styles like bold, underline and italics. Previously, the dashboard's console logs page could only render one ANSI escape code at a time, failing when multiple codes were combined. For example, it could display red text, but not text that was both red and bold.
```

A community contribution from [@mangeg](https://github.com/mangeg) improved support for ANSI escape codes and removed this limitation. Behold:

![Colorful console logs](images/console-logs-ansi-text-format.png)

Another improvement to console logs is hiding unsupported escape codes. Codes that aren't related to displaying text, such as positioning the cursor or communicating with the operating system don't make sense in this UI, and are hidden.

## Telemetry

### Improve telemetry filtering

Traces can now be filtered with attribute values. For example, if you only want to view traces for one endpoint in your app, the `http.route` attribute on HTTP requests can be filtered to a specified value.

Telemetry filtering also supports auto-complete of existing values. The **Add filter** dialog provides a combo box for selecting from values that dashboard has received. This feature makes it much easier to filter to real data and helps avoid typos by entered a value yourself.

<video controls src="videos/trace-filter.mp4" title="Video of filtering traces"></video>

### Combine telemetry from multiple resources

> It's now possible to filter telmetry in the dashboard to all instances of a resource. This is useful if you have multiple replicas for an app and want to view their telemetry together.
> 
> To view telemetry for all instances of a resource, select the top-level option in the resource selector that's marked with `(application)`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a resource has multiple replicas, you can now filter telemetry to view data from all instances at once. Simply select the parent resource, labeled `(application)`.
```

![Filter by all instances of a resource](images/telemetry-resource-filter.png)

### Browser telemetry support

The dashboard now supports OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) over HTTP and cross-origin resource sharing (CORS). These features unlock the ability to send OpenTelemetry from browser apps to the dashbaord.

For example, a browser-based single page app (SPA) can configure the [JavaScript OTEL SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/js/getting-started/browser/) to send structured logs, traces and metrics created in the browser to the dashboard. Browser telemetry is displayed alongside server telemetry.

![Trace detail page with browser telemetry](images/dashboard-browser-telemetry.png)

For more information on configuring browser telemetry, see [Enable browser telemetry](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/fundamentals/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry) documentation.

## App Host (Orchestration)

### Waiting for dependencies

> The app host now supports waiting for dependencies to be ready before starting another resource. This is useful when a resource is taking a long time to start up. The app host will wait for the resource to be ready before starting any dependent resources.

Reviewer 4: While this is an app host feature, I think we can talk about it more in terms of what the user can now do. Something like:

```suggestion
You can now specify that a resource should wait for another resource before starting. This can help avoid connection errors during startup by only starting resources when their dependencies are ready.
```

I removed the mention of long startup time as I figure a race condition is a race condition, regardless of the duration.

```C#
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var queue = builder.AddRabbitMQ("rabbit");

> builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
>     .WithReference(queue).WaitFor(queue);

Reviewer 4: I feel like putting `WaitFor` on its own line makes it easier to spot:

```suggestion
builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
    .WithReference(queue)
    .WaitFor(queue);
```

Or even add an EOL comment to highlight what's new:

```suggestion
builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
    .WithReference(queue)
    .WaitFor(queue); // don't start "api" until "queue" is ready
```

builder.Build().Run();
```

When the app host starts, it will wait for the `rabbit` resource to be ready before starting the `api` resource:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<video controls src="media/waitfor.mp4" title="Title"></video>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

There are two methods exposed to wait for a resource:

1. `WaitFor`: Wait for a resource to be ready before starting another resource.
1. `WaitForCompletion`: Wait for a resource to complete before starting another resource.

#### Resource health checks

`WaitFor` uses health checks to determine if a resource is ready. If a resource does not have any health checks, the app host will wait for the resource to be in the "Running" state before starting the dependent resource.

> For resources that expose HTTP endpoints we have added a streamlined way to define a health check which polls a specific path for a HTTP 200 response.

Reviewer 4: How about focussing on what the user can do?

```suggestion
For resources that expose HTTP endpoints, you can easily add a health check that polls a specific path for an HTTP 200 response.
```

---
title: .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1)
description: Learn what's new with .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1).
ms.date: 10/11/2024
---

# .NET Aspire 9.0 (Release Candidate 1)

.NET Aspire 9.0 is the next major release of .NET Aspire; it will support BOTH .NET 8 (LTS) and .NET 9. .NET Aspire 9.0 addresses some of the most highly requested features and pain points from the community. 

## Upgrade to .NET Aspire 9.0

Instructions on how to upgrade here

- [Install .NET Aspire 9.0 templates](#templates)
- [Upgrade an existing project manually](#upgrade-an-existing-project-to-net-aspire-90-manually)
- [Upgrade an existing project using the Upgrade Assistant](#upgrade-an-existing-project-to-net-aspire-90-using-the-upgrade-assistant)

### Acquisition

> .NET Aspire 9.0 simplifies acquisition by providing a .NET Aspire SDK available as the [📦 `Aspire.AppHost.Sdk`](https://nuget.org/packages/Aspire.AppHost.Sdk) NuGet package. This will no longer require an extra step to acquire the tooling required to build .NET Aspire projects. In other words, starting with .NET Aspire 9—you don't need to install a .NET workload.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if we can define "acquisition" in terms of what the user's goals.

```suggestion
.NET Aspire 9.0 makes it simpler to configure your environment to develop Aspire applications. You no longer need a .NET workload. Instead, add the [📦 `Aspire.AppHost.Sdk`](https://nuget.org/packages/Aspire.AppHost.Sdk) MSBuild SDK to your project and it will be downloaded via NuGet automatically.
```

![Upgrade assistant options](images/upgrade-assistant-2.png)

This will then do some analysis in your project and provide you with a report similar to the following detailing what will be updated. All you need to do now is to click the `Upgrade Selection` button to start the upgrade process:

![Upgrade confirmation](images/upgrade-assistant-confirmation.png)

That's it! You have successfully upgraded your project to .NET Aspire 9.0 RC 1 using the Upgrade Assistant.

## Dashboard

### Manage resource lifecycle

The most requested feature for the dashboard is to manage the lifecycles of your orchestrated named resources. Specifically, the ability to stop, start, and restart resources. This feature is now available in .NET Aspire 9.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<video controls src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3937ca4e-4ac9-4af7-938d-d016aa6277dc" title="Demo of managing resource lifecycle in the dashboard"></video>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

> This feature works for projects, containers and executables. It enables restarting indidivual resources without having to restart the entire app host. For projects, if the debugger is attached, on restart, the debugger will be re-attached.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This feature works for projects, containers and executables. It enables restarting individual resources without having to restart the entire app host. For projects, if the debugger is attached, it will be re-attached on restart.
```

- Responsive design
- Mobile friendly

### Sensitive properties, volumes and health checks in resource details

> Resource details has seen a lot of improvements:

Reviewer 4: Tense is a bit weird. We think of "resource details" as a Blazor component, but if you don't know that it reads strangely.

How about:

```suggestion
The display of resource details has seen several improvements:
```

> - Properties can be marked as sensitive, automatically masking them in the dashboard UI. This is a security feature to avoid accidently disclosing keys or passwords when screen sharing the dashboard with other people. For example, container arguments could pass sensitive information and so are masked by default.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Properties can be marked as sensitive, automatically masking them in the dashboard UI. This security feature helps to avoid accidently disclosing keys or passwords when screen sharing the dashboard with other people. For example, container arguments could pass sensitive information and so are masked by default.
```

- Configured container volumes are listed in resource details.

> - Detailed information about resource health checks, a new feature in Aspire 9, are listed in resource details. This information is useful to understand why a resource might be marked as unhealthy. Find out more about health checks [here](#resource-health-checks).

Reviewer 4: We use ".NET Aspire 9.0" elsewhere. Also tense and repeated words.

```suggestion
- .NET Aspire 9.0 adds support for health checks. Detailed information about these checks can now be viewed in the resource details pane, showing why a resource might be marked as unhealthy or degraded. Find out more about health checks [here](#resource-health-checks).
```

var catalogApi = builder.AddContainer("catalog-api", "catalog-api")
                 .WithHttpEndpoint(targetPort: 8080)
                 .WithHttpHealthCheck("/healthz");

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("store")
    .WithReference(catalogApi.GetEndpoint("http"))
    .WaitFor(catalogApi);

builder.Build().Run();
```

The above example adds a health check to the `catalog-api` resource. The app host will wait for the health check to return a healthy status before starting the `store` resource. It'll determine that the resource is ready when the the /healthz endpoint returns a 200 status code.

While `store` is waiting for `catalog-api` to become healthy, the resources in the dashboard will appear as:

![Waiting for an unhealthy resource before starting](images/waiting-for-unhealthy-resource.png)

The app host's health check mechanism builds upon the `IHealthChecksBuilder` implementation from the `Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.HealthChecks` namespace.

Health checks report data, which is displayed in the dashboard:

![Health check details in the dashboard's resource details view](images/health-check-details.png)

> Creating a custom health check is simple, first define a custom health check, and then associate the health check name with the resource.

Reviewer 4: Feels like there should be a stop after "simple". 

```suggestion
Creating a custom health check is straightforward. Start by defining the health check, then associate its name with any resources it applies to.
```

```C#
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var healthyAfter = DateTime.Now.AddSeconds(20);
builder.Services.AddHealthChecks().AddCheck(
    "delay20secs",
    () => DateTime.Now > healthyAfter ? HealthCheckResult.Healthy() : HealthCheckResult.Unhealthy()
    );

var cache = builder.AddRedis("cache")
                   .WithHealthCheck("delay20secs");

builder.AddProject<Projects.MyApp>("myapp")
       .WithReference(cache).WaitFor(cache);
```

> The above example shows using a custom health check to blow the start up of the dependent project resource until 20 seconds
> after the apphost starts running. The `WithHealthCheck(...)` mechanism provides a simple mechanism to assocate a resource
> with health checks that are already registered in the health checks system by name (`delay20secs`).

Reviewer 4: I found "blow" a bit confusing, and started editing. Seems clearer to me, but I'm not sure.

```suggestion
The above example adds a health check that considers resources unhealthy until 20 seconds after the app host starts, after which it reports them as healthy. This health check is added to the `cache` resource. As `myapp` waits for `cache`, `myapp` won't start until those 20 seconds have elapsed.

The `AddCheck(...)` and `WithHealthCheck(...)` methods provide a simple mechanism to create health checks and associate them with specific resources.
```

> ---

Reviewer 8: Does this file need a different name? `release-candidate-1` seems pretty generic. Why not have `9` in the file name?

## Upgrade to .NET Aspire 9 RC1

Instructions on how to upgrade are detailed in the following:

- [Install .NET Aspire 9 RC1 templates](#templates)
- [Upgrade an existing project manually](#upgrade-an-existing-project-to-net-aspire-9-rc1-manually)
- [Upgrade an existing project using the Upgrade Assistant](#upgrade-an-existing-project-to-net-aspire-9-rc1-using-the-upgrade-assistant)

### Acquisition

.NET Aspire 9 RC1 makes it simpler to configure your environment to develop .NET Aspire applications. You no longer need a .NET workload. Instead, add the [📦 `Aspire.AppHost.Sdk`](https://nuget.org/packages/Aspire.AppHost.Sdk) MSBuild SDK to your project and it will be downloaded via NuGet automatically.

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <Sdk Name="Aspire.AppHost.Sdk" Version="9.0.0-rc.1.24511.1" />

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <IsAspireHost>true</IsAspireHost>

>     <UserSecretsId>0afc20a6-cd99-4bf7-aae1-1359b0d45189</UserSecretsId>

Reviewer 8: Are we concerned people will copy this user secrets ID into this projects?

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't matter AFAIK. This is just a GUID to identify one in your applocal folder so that they can be matched. In fact, we have one burned in on our templates too: https://github.com/dotnet/aspire/blob/f70012e4b8f203f2357a52e8fecb4a78ae2a87b9/src/Aspire.ProjectTemplates/templates/aspire-starter/Aspire-StarterApplication.1.AppHost/Aspire-StarterApplication.1.AppHost.csproj#L11

:::image type="content" source="media/dashboard-browser-telemetry.png" alt-text="Trace detail page with browser telemetry":::

For more information on configuring browser telemetry, see [Enable browser telemetry](../fundamentals/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry.md) documentation.

## App Host (Orchestration)

The [.NET Aspire app host](../fundamentals/app-host-overview.md) is one of the most important features of .NET Aspire. In this release we're introducing many new features to the app host.

### Waiting for dependencies

You can now specify that a resource should wait for another resource before starting. This can help avoid connection errors during startup by only starting resources when their dependencies are ready.

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var queue = builder.AddRabbitMQ("rabbit");

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
       .WithReference(queue)
       .WaitFor(queue); // Don't start "api" until "queue" is ready...

builder.Build().Run();
```

> When the app host starts, it waits for the `rabbit` resource to be ready before starting the `api` resource.

Reviewer 8: It is a little confusing to call the `queue/rabbit` resource with 2 names. Sometimes we call it "queue" like in the comment above, and sometimes we call it `rabbit` like on line 233.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
var rabbit = builder.AddRabbitMQ("rabbit");

builder.AddProject<Projects.WebApplication1>("api")
       .WithReference(rabbit)
       .WaitFor(rabbit); // Don't start "api" until "rabbit" is ready...

builder.Build().Run();
```

When the app host starts, it waits for the `rabbit` resource to be ready before starting the `api` resource.
```

Creating a custom health check is simple, first define a custom health check, and then associate the health check name with the resource.

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var healthyAfter = DateTime.Now.AddSeconds(20);

builder.Services.AddHealthChecks().AddCheck(
    "delay20secs",
    () => DateTime.Now > healthyAfter 
        ? HealthCheckResult.Healthy() 
        : HealthCheckResult.Unhealthy()
    );

var cache = builder.AddRedis("cache")
                   .WithHealthCheck("delay20secs");

builder.AddProject<Projects.MyApp>("myapp")
       .WithReference(cache).WaitFor(cache);
```

The above example adds a health check that considers resources unhealthy until 20 seconds after the app host starts, after which it reports them as healthy. This health check is added to the `cache` resource. As `myapp` waits for `cache`, `myapp` won't start until those 20 seconds have elapsed.

The `AddCheck(...)` and `WithHealthCheck(...)` methods provide a simple mechanism to create health checks and associate them with specific resources.

### Persistent containers

> The app host now supports persistent containers. This is useful when you want to keep the container running even after the app host has stopped. These containers won't be stopped unless they're stopped manually using the container runtime.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The app host now supports persistent containers. This is useful when you want to keep the container running even after the app host has stopped. These containers won't be stopped until they're stopped manually using the container runtime.
```

```csharp
using Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.HealthChecks;
using StackExchange.Redis;

public static class RedisCommandExtensions
{
    public static IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> WithClearCommand(
        this IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> builder)
    {
        builder.WithCommand(
            "clear-cache",
            "Clear Cache",
            async context =>
            {
                var redisConnectionString = await builder.Resource.GetConnectionStringAsync() ??
                    throw new InvalidOperationException(
                        "Unable to get the Redis connection string.");
                
                using var connection = ConnectionMultiplexer.Connect(redisConnectionString);

                await connection.GetDatabase().ExecuteAsync("FLUSHALL");

                return CommandResults.Success();
            },
            context =>
            {
                if (context.ResourceSnapshot.HealthStatus is HealthStatus.Healthy)
                {
                    return ResourceCommandState.Enabled;
                }

                return ResourceCommandState.Disabled;
            });
        return builder;
    }
}
```

> These commands can be run from the dashboard:

Reviewer 8: Do we need to call out that these commands are only available during local development and not when you use the dashboard in ACA?

- [HTTP triggers](/azure/azure-functions/functions-triggers-bindings?pivots=programming-language-csharp#supported-bindings)
- [Azure Storage Queue triggers](/azure/azure-functions/functions-bindings-storage-queue?pivots=programming-language-csharp)
- [Azure Storage Blob triggers](/azure/azure-functions/functions-bindings-storage-blob?pivots=programming-language-csharp)
- [Azure Service Bus triggers](/azure/azure-functions/functions-bindings-service-bus?pivots=programming-language-csharp)
- [Azure Event Hubs triggers](/azure/azure-functions/functions-bindings-event-hubs?pivots=programming-language-csharp)

For the latest information on features support by the Azure Functions integration, see [the tracking issue](https://github.com/dotnet/aspire/issues/920).

### Customization of Azure Container Apps

One of the most requested features is the ability to customize the Azure Container Apps that are created by the app host without dropping to bicep. This is now possible by using the `PublishAsAzureContainerApp` method in `Aspire.Hosting.Azure.AppContainers` namespace. This method allows you to customize the Azure Container App definition that is created by the app host.

> Add the package reference to your project file:

Reviewer 8: Do we need to tell people they need a new `azd`?

Author: How would they get it?
